<h3>Introduction</h3>
It's a <a href="https://youtu.be/noLK78Hgq0A?t=4626">play</a> that will live in infamy.<br/><br/>

Down 28-3 with 6:12 remaining in the 3rd quarter of Super Bowl 51, New England Patriots coach Bill Belichick called a desperation trick play on third down. Tom Brady lateraled the ball to wide receiver (and former college quarterback) Julian Edelman, who attempted a 20 yard downfield pass to Dion Lewis. The pass fell, and the odds of the Atlanta Falcons winning the game - according to ESPN's win probability tracker - rose to a staggering 99.7%.

<br/><br/>Unbeknownst to Falcons fans, that was the closest they'd get to victory that day.

<br/><br/>New England proceeded to mount the greatest comeback in Super Bowl history (and one of the <a href="https://slate.com/culture/2017/02/did-the-falcons-really-have-a-99-percent-chance-to-win-the-super-bowl.html"> 4 greatest comebacks in any game in NFL history</a>), ultimately winning 34-28 in overtime.

<br/><br/>And since the question "Who's the greatest quarterback of all time" has been definitively answered, we can ask another question - How much should we trust ESPN's win probability figures - especially at extreme values of 99% or more?
<h3>Data</h3>
To answer this question, we need to collect the in-game win probabilities and compare them to the final outcome of each game. Fortunately, if you look deep enough in the javascript of ESPN's game summary page for any NFL game* from 2016 and beyond you'll find a variable called "espn.gamepackage.probability.data". This variable maps to a JSON string that contains key data for every play. An extract of a single play's data appears below

<br/><br/>
<code>espn.gamepackage.probability.data =
[{"play":{"period":{"number":1},
"homeScore":0,
"awayScore":0,
"start":{"distance":0,"yardLine":35,"team":{"id":"1"},"down":0,"yardsToEndzone":65},
"text":"M.Bosher kicks 65 yards from ATL 35 to end zone, Touchback.",
"clock":{"displayValue":"15:00"},
"type":{"id":"53","text":"Kickoff","abbreviation":"K"}},
<b>"homeWinPercentage":0.438,
"playId":"40092775239",</b>
"tiePercentage":0,
"secondsLeft":0},</code>

<br/><br/>
<details>
<summary>How do I get that data into Python?</summary>So we can get raw text that looks like JSON-formatted data with everything we need. If we import the javascript text and convert the data above to a JSON object, we can populate a Pandas DataFrame in a few quick steps, leveraging the Pandas <code><a href="https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/version/1.0.1/reference/api/pandas.json_normalize.html">Pandas.json_normalize</a></code> function.
<code>
import json
import pandas
my_json_looking_text = '{"name":"John", "age":30, "car":null}'
my_json = json.loads(my_json_looking_text)
df = pd.json_normalize(my_json) </code>
</details>

<br/>So there we have it! A unique play id, the home team win percentage at the moment of the play, and the home and away team scores. That's the raw data we'll need to evaluate how well the win probability forecasts hold up when one team has a 99% or higher win probability. We'll throw out the other interesting bits of data like play types, period, down and distance, etc. They may be useful in another analysis, but won't be needed for our question today. And since we're collecting this for 1,343 NFL games, we'll save a lot of data and memory by only focusing on the most critical data columns.
<h4>Data Cleanup and Processing</h4>
We have the raw data we need (gameId, playId, homeWinPercentage, play.homeScore, and play.AwayScore). But We still need to tease out some other calculated metrics, and remove some of the records. Specifically, we need to:
<ol>
 	<li>Identify the last play of each game, which serves two goals:
<ul>
 	<li>The home/away team scores at the last play of the game tell us the winner!</li>
 	<li>We need to remove the last play of the game from our subsequent analysis, since the "Win Percent" for some team is always 100% when the game is over (excluding ties).</li>
</ul>
</li>
 	<li>Filter out remaining play-by-play records where no team has a 99% or higher win percentage.</li>
</ol>
<h3>Statistical Methods</h3>
